# Overview

This section describes how vessels in Endless Horizons functions. Vessels
incorporate everything the players together can control and range from cars,
helicopters, tanks all the way up to big capital space vessels.

# Operating Vessels

If the vessel is a land craft (such as a car, tank or motorcycle) the skill
_Driving_ is used. For space craft the skill _Pilot Spacecraft_ is used instead.
Should two pilots or drivers enter in a competition against each other, those
skills are pitched against each other. Those skills also replace _Dodge_ to
avoid obstacles.

In many cases the skill _Mechanics_ can be used to make repairs to those
vehicles. Should the vehicle have mounted guns they are operated using the
_Heavy Weapons_ skill. This includes vehicle mounted heavy machine guns, or
firing the canon (or rifle) of a tank.

# Gravity

There is no artificial gravity in Endless Horizons, except on large space
stations. On these massive space station the "artificial gravity" is generated
by using rotary forces. Ships, and other space vessels that do not provide
gravity are usually navigated by using magnetic boots. All walls, floors and
ceiling of these stations can be walked upon using magnetic boots. These boots
can also be used to walk on the outer hull of vessels. All space suits provide
magnetic boots and day to day clothing issues on vessels includes normal boots
that can be used to walk on magnetic surfaces.

The magnetic boots can be turned off to navigate the micro gravity using the
skill _Micro Gravity_.

Walking and running with magnetic boots is treated as regular movement on a
planet of 1 earth g, for the sake of simplicity.

# Atmosphere

Almost all vessels come with a life support system that provides breathable air
on the ship. This allows people to life and work on those ships without the need
of a space suit. The atmosphere on such ships can be lost however. Damage to the
hull can cause the atmosphere to vent into space. Also, a damaged life support
can stop filtering the used air and slowly cause the air on a vessel to become
toxic to human life.

# Vessel Statistics

## Hit Points

Vessels, just as characters, have hit points. If the hit points reach zero the
vessel is considered _disabled_. This means it will no longer properly operate
and usually all power to its systems are cut. If the vessel reaches its negative
hit points it is complete destroyed, usually killing all crew on board with it.

## Armour

Each vessel may optionally have armour. This armour will always reduce incoming
damage by that amount. Unlike armour of characters, it will never be depleted.

Even the smallest Vehicle armour can stop all small arms fire, except from very
high calibres such as the .50 BMG, the 12.7x108 or above. Anti vehicle weapons
are also highly effective against vehicles with armour, such as RPGs or special
high calibre anti material rifles.

## Shield

Some vehicles come with a shield. This shield gives a given amount of points,
which in case of incoming damage, is always reduced first. Once the shield is
at zero, any incoming damage is done normally to the vessel.

## Installed Modules

Each vessel might optionally have module slots. These module slots can be used
to add additional capabilities to the vessel, such as FTL drives, weapons or
shields. It always depends on the vessel how many module slots exist, and
whether they can be exchanged and upgraded.

## Crew and Passengers

Vessels may require a certain amount of crew to be present to operate the
vehicle efficiently. Such as modern tanks may require a driver, a gunner and
a commander to operate and maximum efficiency. If a certain amount of crew is
required to operate the vehicle, it is listed in the description of the vehicle.

Passengers are always optional, but many vehicles allow you to bring additional
personnel along for the ride.

## Rooms

Bigger vessels may be fitted with additional rooms. See the chapter Rooms for
additional information.

## Docking bays

Larger vessels, medium and above, also sometimes come with a docking bays.
Docking bays house smaller vessels (usually just small vessels). See the ship
details on how many small vessels the ship is capable of housing and operating.
A docking bay also often comes with all necessary equipment to maintain the
smaller vessel, such as repair and refuiling stations.

Docking bays sometimes count as rooms. If that is the case, the ship does not
come with docking bays per default; but a room has been refitted to fit a small
vessel.

## Cargo Bays

Cargo bays do just what they say on the tin: Carry and hold cargo. It is
specified in the ship's detailed list on how much cargo the ship is capable of
carrying.

## Speed

The speed factor describes how nimble the aircraft is. For most small vessels
this value is positive, giving the pilot a bonus in dog fights and while evading
enemy fire. Bigger vessels might even have a negative value, representing their
huge mass and slow and sluggish manoeuvring capabilities.

If the speed is not given, this means that the vessel is stationary, either
because the drives have failed, or because the vessel is a station.

## Type

All vessels are given one more types, defining in which environments they
operate in. _Space_ means that the vehicle is capable of manoeuvring in outer
space, _air_ means that is also capable of flying through an atmosphere. If a
vehicle has both _space_ and _air_ listed, the vehicle is capable of making a
transition from atmosphere to outer space and vice versa. _Land_ means that
the vehicle moves on land, and _water_ means that it moves on or in water.

An amphibious troop transporter might have _land_ and _water_ as it's types,
and a huge capital vessel might only have _space_ as it is not capable of
entering an atmosphere.

### <i class="fa fa-2x ehicon-air"></i> Air

### <i class="fa fa-2x ehicon-space"></i> Space

### <i class="fa fa-2x ehicon-land"></i> Land

### <i class="fa fa-2x ehicon-water"></i> Water

## Vessel Size

The vessels are split into different size categories. Modules from one size
category are not interchangeable from one size category to another.

### Small Vessels

Small Vessels usually crew around five to ten people. They are the most common
types of vessels, and incorporate things like cars, helicopters, tanks,
transporters and space attack fighters, bombers and other small aircraft.

Small Spacecraft and other small vessels are special in that vessels of higher
size types can usually carry small vessels around with them.

### Medium Vessels

Medium vessels usually have a crew of around 10 to 50 people. Most of the medium
vessels are either space craft, or large water vessels such as submarines or
destroyers. Some medium vessels may even be able to carry a small vessel. Such
as a larger destroyer or frigate may have small landing vessels or attack craft
stored.

### Large Vessels

Large vessels carry around 50 to a 100 crew, and most commonly large space
destroyers, huge cruise liners or massive tanking and trading vessels. They
often come with a fleet of small vessels, to be used as a transfer vessels,
landing vessels or transport and attack craft.

### Capital Vessels

Capital vessels are huge and massive spacecraft and ships that usually hold more
than 150 in crew. They are the backbone of most modern attack fleets and
fearsome in combat. Capital vessels usually hold a massive amount of small
vessels as attack fighters, bombers and transport ships and are usually
accompanied by large vessels and even medium vessels to give them fire support.

Only the biggest armies, largest companies and richest colonies can afford to
build and operate capital vessels. They come with a wide variety of weapons and
their presence alone is often enough to scare enemies into submission.

A special kind of capital vessel that is not used for combat is the colony ship.
It houses everything required to send people to a new planet for terraforming
and colonisation.
