In this chapter we will deal with how social interactions between the player
characters and non-player characters (NPCs) should be handled by the game
master.

## Interactions with NPCs

Social interactions range from bartering to convince a trader to pay more money
for a piece of junk than he normally would, from grand galas with many single
interactions between various important figures from business and politics.

The rule of thumb is that if the conversation is something that influences the
over all story arc, or if the players wish to achieve something particular with
it, a roll should me made for each separate instance. A short speech might just
be a single check, whereas long and important speeches could be split into
multiple checks.

A guide on how to set the DC can be found further down.

## Player vs. Character

Players might be great at social interactions whereas the character might not be
and vice versa. If the player delivers a good motivational speech but his
character has low charisma rank and no skills in any speech related skill, it is
advisable to roll anyhow. The same is true the other way around, for the
character's ability are not the same as the player's abilities.

## Interacting

Social interactions come in many forms, shapes and sizes. Trying to convince
someone else that your own viewpoint is right, is one example. A player can
achieve this in many different ways: He can use deceit, intimidation or by
simply trying to talk and arguing the point.

The player decides what he wishes to do and the game master decides the DC. For
each instance of interaction a separate roll is needed. If more than one roll is
involved it is common that a few among them might fail. Partial successes are
plausible, for example you might intimidate an engineer into disabling the
security system and lie to him about the reason. Although you might succeed and
he disables the system, he might not believe the reason and will still report
this to his superiors.

To lie or intimidate to an NPC the player and the NPC engage in a contest
between the initiator's _Oratory_ and receiver's _Questioning_ skill. The
initiator has to win the contest to successfully convince the target of the
lie, or to intimidate the target into submission. Just as described in the
contest section of 'Checks and Difficulties' award additional dices to the
party that has an additional advantage over the other.
