# Overview

When a character performs complex operations a skill is involved, that your
character has to learn first. Whether it be operating a vehicle, shooting a
firearm, climbing a steep cliff or trying to convince another character or
NPC. Each skill is associated with two abilities. If a skill check is made,
a trained character can add the modifier of those abilities to his roll.

Some skills are special, as in they require a lot of effort to learn and use
right, or require special materials, trainers or facilities to learn properly.

Each skill has a rank that goes from zero to ten. With zero meaning that the
character has just learned the skill and cannot draw upon any experience when
performing tasks. Ten represents absolute mastery.

# Learning new skills

Normal skills take one CCP to unlock, upon which the skill has a rank of
zero. If the skill is a special skill, the unlock costs are ten CCP instead.

Once the skill is learned, rank increases can be bought with the same exact
amount of CCP as the next rank. So to increase a skill from 3 to 4, you'd have
to pay 4 CCP.

# Using skills

Each task, against which your skill is pitched against, has a base difficulty.
If the base difficulty is at or below your skill level you may be able to
perform the task without rolling your dice in come circumstances. This means
that your character can perform this task given enough time and no adverse
external influences.

For example, an avid shooter can always hit his target on his range, if he's
rested and aims long enough. But this doesn't mean he can hit another target
on the same distance as easy in the heat of combat, fatigued by days of
fighting. As soon as external influences come into affect, you _have to roll_.

If you have unlocked a skill you make a skill check rolling a ten-sided dice,
adding the appropriate ability modifiers, and adding the skill's rank.

If you have not unlocked the skill you simply roll a ten-sided dice and only
add negative ability modifiers to the roll.

When your result exceeds or is equal to the tasks difficulty (which is the base
difficulty, plus any situational hindrances) you succeed. Please see tasks and
_Checks and Difficulties_ for rules on calculating the DC, and causing minor,
medium or major successes or failures.
