# Introduction

This section will guide you through the character creation. Characters in
Endless Horizons are your average Joe and Jane, that fight for survival in
the ultimate hostile environment: space.

# Character Creation Points

All characters are built and advanced with Character Creation Points (CCP).
You receive a given amount, specified by your game master at the start of the
campaign, and you receive more as you go through the campaign. They are
awarded as your character defeats enemies, finish quests and get over the
dangers in the galaxy.

With CCP you can buy ability increases, improve skills, and even allow you to
get special features and perks for your character.

For most games you will start with 50 CCP. But it is always up to the game
master, and he or she might adjust the number to fit the theme of his game.

# Pick a Background

In Endless Horizons your character learns skills that define what he or she is
good at. Backgrounds are just a set of predefined skills that fit to a certain
theme, education or training your character could have received. They are
optional, however, and experienced players might wish to pick skills for their
character individually.

Backgrounds are designed to help you get started with creating your character,
but shouldn't limit you in the possibilities. If you feel that none of the
backgrounds fit, and you do not wish to pick the skills on your own you should
talk to your game master. A game master can create new backgrounds for you.

A background usually comes with an ability increase. This increase stacks with
your changes in abilities you made already. A background also comes with
several skills unlocked and raised to certain ranks.

You are free to select more tan one background, but neither the skills nor the
ability increases stack with each other. Only the highest one applies.

# Pick Skills

Each skill your character wishes to master has be trained. There are four
stages of proficiency within each skill: untrained, trained, experienced,
expert and master. Each character is free to pick and train skills as he or
she pleases without restrictions.
