# Overview

When a character performs complex operations a skill is involved, that your
character has to learn first. Whether it be operating a vehicle, shooting a
firearm, climbing a steep cliff or trying to convince another character or
NPC. Each skill is associated with two abilities. If a skill check is made,
a trained character can add the modifier of those abilities to his roll.

Some skills are special, as in they require a lot of effort to learn and use
right, or require special materials, trainers or facilities to learn properly.
There are also speciality skills. These skills cannot be learned on their own,
but reflect a specialisation of an already existing skill. They help to
specialise and refine a character.

Each skill has a rank that goes from zero to ten. With zero meaning that the
character has just learned the skill and cannot draw upon any experience when
performing tasks. Ten represents absolute mastery.

# Learning new skills

Normal skills take one CCP to unlock, upon which the skill has a rank of
zero. If the skill is a special skill, the unlock costs are ten CCP instead.

Once the skill is learned, rank increases can be bought with the same exact
number of CCP as the next rank.

# Using skills

Each task, against which your skill is pitched against, has a base difficulty.
If the base difficulty is at or below your skill level you may be able to
perform the task without rolling your dice in come circumstances. This means
that your character can perform this task given enough time and no adverse
external influences.

For example, an avid shooter can always hit his target on his range, if he's
rested and aims long enough. But this doesn't mean he can hit another target
on the same distance as easy in the heat of combat, fatigued by days of
fighting. As soon as external influences come into affect, you _have to roll_.

If you have unlocked a skill you make a skill check rolling a ten-sided dice,
adding the appropriate ability modifiers, adding the skill rank and adding any
specialised skill ranks (if applicable).

If you have not unlocked the skill you simply roll a ten-sided dice and only
add negative ability modifiers to the roll.

When your result exceeds or is equal to the tasks difficulty (which is the base
difficulty, plus any situational hindrances) you succeed. Please see tasks and
_Checks and Difficulties_ for rules on causing minor, medium or major
successes or failures.

# Available skills

Below you will find a list of all the base skills available in game. It is of
course up the GM to adapt or add to the list below.

- _Acrobatics_: With acrobatics you can perform such acts as rope
  walking, tumbling or other specialised manoeuvres. Uses _Dexterity_ and
  _Constitution_.

- _Acting_: The ability to play a role and successfully emulate behaviours,
  emotions and character traits. Uses _Charisma_ and _Intelligence_.

- _Climbing_: Allows you to climb walls, cliffs and other obstacles. It
  helps with finding the right footing while doing so. Uses _Strength_
  and _Constitution_.

- _Dodging_: A basic combat skill to move out of harm's way. It can be
  used as an action to avoid getting hit in melee combat, as well as for
  "hitting the deck" in case of incoming enemy fire. Uses _Dexterity_
  and _Perception_.

- _Driving_: Driving involves operating and steering land vehicles (such as
  cars, trucks or motorcycles). Driving also includes heavy machinery such as
  skid loaders and tracked vehicles (tanks). To fire a tank however, please see
  the _Heavy Weapons_ skill. It uses _Perception_ and _Dexterity_.

- _Engineering (Any) (Special)_: You have studied the art of applying
  mathematics, science and knowledge of materials to craft and construct
  devices, buildings and all other sorts of man made constructs. It uses
  _Intelligence_ and _Intelligence_. Sub types of this skill can
  relate to (but are not limited to: Computers, Buildings, Vehicles or
  Spacecraft.

- _Escape Artist_: This is the skill to escape from ropes, handcuffs and
  other restraints. It uses _Strength_ and _Dexterity_.

- _First Aid_: First aid comprises techniques ranging from applying
  intricate bandages to wounds, performing CPR and Heimlich manoeuvres, to some
  basic skills and techniques from medicine such as stitching a wound. It uses
  _Intelligence_ and _Perception_.

- _Heavy Weapons_: Heavy weapons are all weapons that cannot be effectively
  carried into combat, and include things such as a howitzers, large mortars,
  turrets or firing a tank. It uses _Dexterity_ and _Perception_.

- _Intrusion_: This skill covers everything from breaking and entering,
  be it legally or illegally. This includes both mechanical and electronic
  locks and counter measures (such as alarms, biometric access controls and so
  forth). It uses _Dexterity_ and _Intelligence_.

- _Language_: Each character is assumed to automatically have his mother
  tongue at rank 5 (spoken, reading and writing). Any additional language is a
  separate skill. Each language skill is based on _Perception_ and
  _Intelligence_.

- _Light Weapons_: This skill grants training in man portable military
  grade hardware, such as recoilless rifles, grenade launchers, mortars, light
  and heavy machine guns. It uses _Perception_ and _Dexterity_.

- _Mechanics_: Mechanics allows you to pop open a hood of a car and
  instantly recognise why it won't start. It involves repairs and maintenance
  for machines big and small, as well as construction of new devices
  from basic materials. It requires _Dexterity_ and
  _Intelligence_.

- _Medicine (Special)_: Medicine is the science of diagnosing, treating and
  preventing diseases and trauma. It also covers therapy and care for patients.
  A full degree and licence as a doctor requires years of learning and training.
  It has many specialised sub fields such as surgery or trauma care. To treat a
  patient use _Perception_ and _Intelligence_ to diagnose and treat,
  and when performing surgery use _Perception_ and _Dexterity_.

- _Melee Combat_: You are trained in the art of hand to hand combat. This
  skill includes basic training with common melee weapons (knife, batons or
  clubs). To hit an opponent you use _Dexterity_ and _Strength_.
  The damage depends on the weapon used.

- _Micro Gravity_: Allows manoeuvring in micro gravity environments. Uses
  _Dexterity_ and _Strength_.

- _Navigation_: Allows a character to use charts, maps or a navigational
  computer to effectively navigate from point A to point B. Uses
  _Intelligence_ and _Perception_.

- _Notice_: Notice is used to detect others who are hiding, or to notice
  something that is hidden or not obvious. Uses _Perception_ and
  _Intelligence_.

- _Oratory_: The art of, lying, intimidating, and giving threats as well
  as giving motivational speeches. It uses _Intelligence_ and _Charisma_.

- _Pilot Spacecraft (Special)_: This special skill allows you to pilot all
  kinds of space vessels. The skill includes things as docking, evasive
  manoeuvres and dog fighting. It requires _Dexterity_ and
  _Perception_

- _Public Affairs_: Knowing who hates and likes who, and how to behave in
  various social settings and social events. It also incorporates knowledge about
  famous figures, such as politicians, important or influential business people
  and so forth. Uses _Intelligence_ and _Charisma_.

- _Questioning_: The opposite skill to Oratory. The art of interrogating,
  spotting lies and otherwise get the truth out of people. It can also be used
  to see through idle threats or resisting intimidation attempts. It uses
  _Charisma_ and _Intelligence_.

- _Radio Operations_: This skill allows you to operate radio signal
  encryption, identify radio signals, and communicate with others using proper
  radio communication protocol and standards. Uses _Charisma_ and
  _Intelligence_

- _Running_: This skill includes running for endurance (marathon) as well as
  sprinting. It uses _Strength_ and _Constitution_.

- _Science (Any) (Special)_: You are educated and trained one of the
  numerous fields of science. All sciences use _Intelligence_ twice, except
  when otherwise noted. Some specialities include: _Computer_ which
  incorporates the science of IT, including programming or hacking;
  _Physics_, _Chemistry_, _Biology_ and various others. Each
  field is a separate skill.

- _Sleight of Hand_: The art of performing small actions with no one else
  noticing. For example cheating at card games, pick pocketing another person
  or hide a small weapon on one's own body. It uses _Dexterity_ and
  _Charisma_.

- _Small Arms_: The small arms skill allows a character to aim, shoot,
  reload and maintain certain fire arms. Many firearms that are can be learned
  without special training, while some others (especially military grade
  hardware) requires special training (see _Light Weapons_). Firearms rely
  on _Perception_ and _Dexterity_. Rifles and handguns handle
  differently and are thus split up in two separate speciality skills.

- _Small Unit Tactics_: This skill includes everything a soldier needs to
  know about tactics: How to move in a fire squad, basic drill, infiltration
  techniques, patrolling, ambushing and so forth. It uses _Intelligence_ and
  _Perception_.

- _Stealth_: The art of sneaking, hiding and remaining hidden. Uses
  _Dexterity_ and _Intelligence_.

- _Swimming_: Zero rank allows the character to float, while the first rank
  allows a character to swim. Higher ranks allows the character to swim with
  clothes, gear or even while helping another who can't swim. Uses _Strength_
  and _Constitution_.

- _Throwing_: Need to make a grenade go really far away towards the enemy?
  Use _Strength_ and _Dexterity_ to achieve that! This skill also
  includes thrown weapons such as throwing axes or knives.
